[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
So what does a CEO and a senior
executive for the past 30 years
know about creating success
through rituals, specifically?
Well, a lot.
Chris Attwood is
my guest, and he
is the co-author of the New York
Times bestseller, "The Passion
Test" along with Janet
Attwood, and he's also
an expert in the field
of human consciousness
and also deeply grounded in the
practical world of business.
His latest book is called
"Your Hidden Riches:
Unleashing the Power
of Ritual to Create
a Life of Meaning and Purpose."
Welcome to the show.
Thanks for being here.
>>CHRIS ATTWOOD:
Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: So ritual, what
exactly do you mean by ritual?
>>ATTWOOD: Hmm.
People have all sorts
of ideas about rituals.
And so when we
talk about rituals,
we're not talking about
religious practices,
although there are
beautiful rituals
in all religious traditions
around the world.
We're also not talking
about superstition.
>>LISA: There are also not
so beautiful ones, right?
>>ATTWOOD: There are.
>>LISA: There's voodoo
and things like that.
Yeah.
>>ATTWOOD: There are
those sort of things.
Yeah.
Biker gangs who use
rituals as well.
And that brings up the point,
rituals really are tools.
They can be used for
good or bad purposes.
But I remember we talked with
one of the leading researchers
on ritual, Dr. Andrew Newberg,
as we were writing the book
and what he said is
that rituals are amoral.
So rituals in and
of themselves aren't
for one purpose or another.
Just like a hammer.
You can use a hammer
to build a house,
or you can use it to tear down.
And so we specifically
use rituals
to say that rituals are
conscious intentional practices
used to improve
your life, and you
make them habitual because
they do improve your life.
>>LISA: Does the
physical act of a ritual
help you actually manifest
something a little bit stronger
than just the intention process?
>>ATTWOOD: It's
a great question.
The truth is what
helps us manifest
anything is the power of
our awareness, our ability
to connect with the deepest
part of our own nature,
and then bring that
manifestation from that
place out into the world.
So intention can
be very powerful
when the individual is connected
to that part of themselves,
to that deep,
inner part, what we
call your spiritual
core, transcendent core.
But rituals are
really a mechanism
to be able to connect with that.
>>LISA: So you're not
talking necessarily
about lighting a candle and
sitting in a meditation ritual
type of thing.
You're talking about
everyday, super practical.
You're re-framing the idea
of ritual in this book,
aren't you?
>>ATTWOOD: Well, we're
talking about both frankly.
Because we talk about everyday
rituals, which are easy,
simple things you can
incorporate in your day
as conscious,
intentional practices,
and we also talk about
ceremonial rituals, which
are more involved,
which may involve
lighting candles and
music and incense
and all of those things.
But they actually serve
two very distinct purposes.
>>LISA: So could a ritual--
I mean, there's rituals
in religious situations.
There's rituals in tribal
situations and so forth,
culturally, but
could a ritual be--
what's the difference between
a ritual and a habit, something
that you do every single
day to create an outcome.
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah.
We all have good and bad habits,
but most of the time, these
are things that
develop unconsciously,
and they're just mental
and emotional patterns
in our lives.
By contrast, rituals
are conscious.
They're intentional.
They're something that you
choose to make habitual
because it's going to make
your life better in some way,
and I'll give you an example.
There's a World
Cup Soccer player
by the name of Leighton Baines.
He plays for the British team.
Every time he comes
on the playing field
you'll see him kneel
down, untie his shoes,
and then tie his shoes again.
Now you can't really
say that's a good habit.
You can't really say
that's a bad habit.
It's not a habit.
It's a ritual.
>>LISA: It's amoral.
>>ATTWOOD: It's amoral
[LAUGHING]
But it has a purpose for him.
Actually in that
context he's using it
for a purpose that
serves him, which
is to get him into a mental
and emotional state where he's
ready to perform at his
best and to stay focused,
even when there are
thousands of fans screaming
in the stands,
millions of people
watching him on television.
That ritual separates his
everyday daily activities,
his ordinary life, from his
life on the playing field,
and by performing that ritual,
it helps him make a transition.
I was recently talking
with Jack Canfield, who
you know very well as well,
and he was sharing his rituals
before he gets on stage
to do presentations.
And it's the same thing, same
thing as Leighton Baines.
He has specific rituals
that he goes through
before he speaks to
get him in that state
where he's ready to be
of greatest service.
That's his intention.
Let me be of service.
Let me be able to help
and support these people
in the best way that I'm able.
And so he has a whole
visualization exercise
that he goes through,
and he creates
an expression of gratitude.
He says an expression
of gratitude
before he goes on, asking that
he be used in the situation
to be able to be
really of service.
>>LISA: So that's a
good example of ritual.
So back to the soccer
player for a second.
Do you think that that
soccer player won the game
when he did that
on his shoes once--
and I mean-- so he creates
that intention again?
>>ATTWOOD: Now it may be.
I don't know, specifically, the
history of how it came to be,
but it could be that he had
a good experience with it.
>>LISA: The person that
wears the same shirt,
that type of thing.
This is my lucky shirt.
This is my lucky--
we used to have what?
The rabbit's foot.
>>ATTWOOD: Rabbit's foot, yeah.
>>LISA: [LAUGHING]
>>ATTWOOD: Well,
I love this one.
You know actor Colin Farrell?
And every time he
starts a new movie,
he wears the same boxer shorts.
>>LISA: Oh, he does?
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah.
They have shamrocks on them, and
they say the luck of the Irish.
But it's a good other example
of why we use rituals,
because what he's doing is he
was-- he's reminding himself,
I'm Irish.
I'm lucky.
Things are going
to come into place.
I'm going to do a great movie.
It's just a
re-enforcement for what
he intends to experience
when he's doing that movie,
and that's really one of the
powers that ritual has-- is
it allows us to be
able to get in a space
where we can create what we
choose to have in our life.
>>LISA: How can you use it
to really improve your life?
In what situation would it
work with to improve your life?
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah.
So the ritual has many
purposes from many different
perspectives, and of course,
improve is a relative term.
But what you'll see is in
every industry people who
are really, really
successful have all
incorporated the
rituals into their life
in one way or another.
And so you see
that sports players
use rituals to improve
their performance,
to be able to get their mind
into the game as it were.
The musicians and
artists use rituals
to spark their
creativity so that they
can be the best at
what their passion is.
Business leaders use rituals
to create cohesive teams
and to create strong
corporate cultures.
Celebrities use
rituals to create
balance between their personal
lives and their work lives.
And for me, all of those
are improving your life.
>>LISA: I'd love to hear some
ideas around those rituals,
because it is
fascinating, but first
let's take a look
at the slide here.
And it just kind
of shows us what
ritual-- what your
idea of rituals are
and why we should perform them.
So one is rituals give
more meaning to life,
and that's what it says
there on the slide.
>>ATTWOOD: So can
we talk about that?
>>LISA: Yes, please.
>>ATTWOOD: Because
rituals make things real.
If you look at the rituals, the
traditional rituals in cultures
all around the world and you
can look right here at home,
because we've all
experienced a wedding, right?
>>LISA: Yes, right.
>>ATTWOOD: And what
does a wedding do?
A wedding takes
something abstract, which
is this commitment that
two people are making,
and it makes it concrete,
it makes it real.
We bring all of our friends
and our family together,
and we have all the pomp
and the circumstance
and music and poetry, and
all these amazing things
to create--
>>LISA: And the vows.
>>ATTWOOD: Vows-- memorable
experience, right?
And it makes that real.
It makes this thing that was
abstract something that's
more concrete.
We can see it, feel
it, experience it.
And one of the great things
about a wedding ritual,
and other kinds of
ceremonial rituals,
is that they help to
connect us with that deeper
part of ourselves.
That's why you probably--
maybe you've experienced this,
but we've all seen
or been the one who's
been crying at a wedding, right?
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>ATTWOOD: And why
does that happen?
It's because through
that ceremony,
through this coming together
and all the elements that
have been put
together, we connect
with that part of ourselves
which says this is beautiful,
and we connect with that
idea that two people could
love each other enough to
be able to make a commitment
to spend a whole life
together, and that touches us.
>>LISA: That's a
very powerful one,
because it does energetically
seem to change a relationship,
when someone-- when a couple
actually cements their vows
and witnesses are
about, and it gets
put on paper through contract.
It does change the
energy of a relationship.
>>ATTWOOD: It makes it real.
>>LISA: It does.
>>ATTWOOD: It makes it concrete.
It makes it something more than
just a passing fancy, right?
>>LISA: I mean, could you
create that without the ritual,
just live together and
act as if you're married?
You probably couldn't create
the same thing, could you?
>>ATTWOOD: Well,
it's interesting.
People can live together
without a marriage ceremony
and certainly be
committed to each other.
There's no question about that.
But will they have the same
experience, the same sense
that this is something
that we shared together
in that same way.
>>LISA: I kind of asked
the question in wonderment
because I don't know
if it would or not.
I mean, some people think no.
You don't need the
ceremony to be in love.
And then at the same
time, the society
looks at a couple who
has had that ceremony as
officially married.
It's interesting.
>>ATTWOOD: Well,
and you're going
to find all kinds of answers.
>>LISA: Of course, of course.
>>ATTWOOD: Everybody's going
to feel one way or the other,
and-- and I know for me,
having been fortunate enough
to marry a beautiful woman
who's the mother of my children,
that the ceremony ev-- and ours
was a very simple ceremony,
you know-- I don't know if
you know the story, Lisa,
but we woke up one
morning and decided
to get married that day.
>>LISA: Oh!
>>ATTWOOD: And we gathered
a couple of friends
and went off to Muir Woods in
the San Francisco Bay area.
>>LISA: Oh nice!
>>ATTWOOD: And we created
this amazing little ritual
and ceremony, and
it was very special.
It created a different
character to our relationship--
>>LISA: But that added meaning.
>>ATTWOOD: And I wouldn't want
to be without it, personally.
>>LISA: Interesting.
All right, so back to the idea
of why performing rituals.
It also-- The rituals help
calm us and create more balance
in our life.
Can you give me an example
of a ritual that does that?
>>ATTWOOD: Sure.
So what we say in
"Your Hidden Riches"
is that rituals help you
manage your time, your energy,
and your thinking, and all
of us need that, right?
And so the rituals are a way
of bringing ourselves back
to ourself.
And it could be by
establishing a routine
in our life, a daily
set of rituals,
so that we have time for
exercise, for stretching,
for breathing, for
meditation, or prayer.
>>LISA: Oh, so
those are rituals?
>>ATTWOOD: Those
are all rituals.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah.
And then as we
come into our day,
having had that sequence of
actively engaging our body,
and then quieting our
mind and our body as well,
when we come into our
activity, then we're
more calm-- when things
go more smoothly-- that we
don't feel as upset.
Then there are
specific rituals that
can be done for the
purpose of calming.
And one of the things
we teach in the book
is called alternate
nostril breathing.
It's very simple.
Just-- You're just breathing,
breathing out and in
from one nostril and
then reversing it.
>>LISA: It's calming.
>>ATTWOOD: And that
simple ritual-- doing it
for five minutes, 10
minutes-- if you're
in a situation where you feel
a lot of stress, anxiousness,
worry, tension, you can
do it for a few minutes,
and you'll feel your
whole system settle down.
You become relaxed, at
ease, and so then you
can go on and really
perform your best.
>>LISA: So that
also could help you
focus, which is another
reason of why doing rituals
is because it'd help
you really focus,
which we need these days.
>>ATTWOOD: Absolutely.
Well, and I use Leighton Baines
as the example-- the tying
and untying his shoes.
What he's doing
there-- and he says
this-- I mean he doesn't
quite say it in the same way
I do; he says something
about it helps
me get my head on straight.
But what he means is
that it's helping get him
into a mental and emotional
state where he's ready
and in that state to
both perform at his best
and also to really focus.
And there's another one I love,
Serena Williams, tennis player.
Every time before
she serves, she
bounces the ball
exactly five times.
Now why five times?
>>LISA: Oh really?
I never noticed that.
Yeah.
>>ATTWOOD: Five times.
Because by counting
the number of bounces,
where is her attention?
>>LISA: On the ball.
>>ATTWOOD: Exactly.
So she's not worried about
what anyone in the stand
is going to think.
She's not worried
about whether she's
going to perform well or not.
She's focused and present.
And so when she-- And then
because she's practiced
so much, she now can go
into the automatic motion
of making her serve.
>>LISA: How did you find all
of these different rituals?
Did you just look
and they're there?
>>ATTWOOD: That's what
happens when you write a book.
[LAUGHING]
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>ATTWOOD: You
research; you look.
>>LISA: Everything's around you.
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah.
It's all here.
And the amazing thing, Lisa, was
that when we wrote this book,
really the reason we wrote
it is because, for years,
more than a decade now, we've
been helping people discover
their passions and
connect with their purpose
through the Passion Test.
People find their
top five passions,
and then they ask us
consistently, OK, now
how do I make my passions real?
>>LISA: How do I get
them into my life?
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah, how
do I make a living?
How do I meet my
responsibilities?
How do I follow my
passions and still do
everything I'm
committed to doing?
And remember I said
rituals make things real.
And what Janet and
I realized is that,
when we looked at our
own lives, the thing
that had made such a
difference because both of us
have been doing rituals since
we were teenagers really--
and that it's those
rituals are what
have allowed us, not only
to be ready for success
as it came, but also when things
showed up that weren't quite
what we wanted them to be,
to be able to really recover
more quickly and come
back to ourselves so we
could take the next step.
>>LISA: What's a ritual
for when things go wrong,
when chaos ensues?
What is a ritual for that?
>>ATTWOOD: Well, so really
it's coming back to yourself.
And in the book we call
it the expansion process.
It's part of what we generally
call nature's guidance system.
Nature is-- or life
is always giving us
clues about what
direction to take.
And when we're upset,
when we just feel like--
[SCREAMS]
Things are going crazy, and
nothing's working, then that's
what we call contraction.
We shut down, and we
naturally want to go inward.
And so that's what we're
supposed to do at that time.
And the problem comes when
we try and push through.
We say, OK, I've got
to make it happen.
I'm going to do it anyway.
And then things really
fall apart at that point.
When we relax into
it, and that's we
call the expansion process.
We relax into it,
allow ourselves
to feel what it
is we're feeling,
because that's really the first
step to allowing that to heal.
And oftentimes
we'll notice there's
a physical sensation
in our body.
We let our attention,
our awareness,
go to that physical sensation.
And if we feel like
crying, we cry.
If we are angry, we scream
into a pillow or-- we
don't take it out someone
else, but whatever
we need to be able to
feel what we're feeling.
And then we use the
tools, and that's rituals.
We use those things that we know
will allow us to expand again.
And that could be meditation.
>>LISA: Breathing.
>>ATTWOOD: It
could be breathing.
>>LISA: Nap.
[LAUGHING]
>>ATTWOOD: It could be exercise.
It could be going for a walk.
It could be-- there are
many different things.
And one of the things that we've
been recommending to people
for years that I love is create
an emergency use worksheet.
>>LISA: Emergency use worksheet?
[LAUGHING]
>>ATTWOOD: That's right.
So this is the thing.
>>LISA: That's funny.
>>ATTWOOD: Think about
when you were last really,
really, really upset.
You can imagine that?
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>ATTWOOD: And when you're
in the midst of that upset,
are you likely to remember the
things that will help you feel
better or--
>>LISA: No.
>>ATTWOOD: Or be immersed in--
[SCREAMS]
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ATTWOOD: So the
emergency worksheet
is for those times when
you're really upset,
and you felt the
feelings, but you just
remember, oh, I
should look at this.
Oh yeah, I could
do that, and I'll
feel better because you're
not likely to think of it when
you're all upset.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
Once I took a picture
of my vision board,
and I made it the
screensaver on my phone,
so every time I
would look at that,
it would reinforce
what my goals were.
And subconsciously,
every time I would
put that, it would
reinforce those goals.
I finally got rid
of the screensaver
because I had accomplished
all of those goals.
>>ATTWOOD: [LAUGHING]
There you go.
Now you need to
have the next set.
>>LISA: Yes, I have
to do that over again.
>>ATTWOOD: Well,
and that's what we
tell people to do
with their passions.
Identify your top five passions,
then put them on your phone,
put them on your computer.
Write them out, put them
on your refrigerator.
>>LISA: That's a good idea.
>>ATTWOOD: Put them
in your bathroom
because the key to
living your passions
is whenever you're faced
with a choice, a decision,
or an opportunity, choose
in favor of those passions.
And the way to do
that is ritualizing
the act of making decisions
by having those passions where
you can see them.
>>LISA: So now let's
talk about having rituals
make you healthy-- so
getting rid of addictions--
so let's take smoking
as an example.
What type of ritual can
you use, because smoking
itself is a ritual, right?
>>ATTWOOD: Well,
it's an addiction.
>>LISA: It's an addiction.
Oh, what's the difference?
>>ATTWOOD: You could
say it's a ritual,
but it's a ritual that
doesn't improve your life,
so it's not a ritual that
meets our definition.
And it's true.
People use the word
ritual for things
that are both negative
in their consequences
and positive in
their consequences.
We've chosen in the book
to define it narrowly
as practices that
improve your life.
>>LISA: That's a
good distinction.
Yes.
>>ATTWOOD: When it comes
to smoking-- addictions
of any kind-- are simply
patterns that we've created.
They're maybe deep
patterns, and when
it comes to drugs or cigarettes
or alcohol, those sorts
of things, they're more
than just mental patterns
or emotional patterns;
they're actually
physical patterns that have
been created in our body,
so we have to change
those patterns.
And the way we
change those patterns
is by installing a
new set of patterns,
a new set of activities,
which we can call rituals.
Alcoholics Anonymous,
or AA, is a complete set
of rituals for
overcoming addiction.
And if you go through,
it's a 12-step program,
and the whole process
is ritualized.
And the reason is is
because these people need
to create a new set of
patterns, and so by installing
these healthy patterns,
constructive patterns, then
it allows them to break
the old patterns which
were established
through the addiction.
>>LISA: So it's basically
a 12-step ritual?
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah, exactly.
>>LISA: So to undo
an old pattern--
so creating a new pattern
to undo an old pattern.
>>ATTWOOD: See,
this is what's so
wonderful is that you
wanna change a pattern,
you don't have to go
and analyze the problem.
You don't have to go and
figure out, oh, what did I do
and what a terrible
person I was.
And how do I have to
change every little way I
speak or think or
do or anything.
You don't have to
analyze the problem.
It's simple as, if you want
to-- if you go into a dark room
and you want to make it light,
just turn on the light switch.
So in the same way, you want
to change a pattern that
isn't useful, you
install a new pattern
that you know is
constructive and useful,
and we call that a ritual.
>>LISA: Well, it's
also a good way
to put reminders
back into your life.
So what are some of
the rituals that you
do to-- that you create
on a daily basis,
and how did you stumble
upon all of this?
>>ATTWOOD: Well, my whole
introduction to ritual
came through meditation
because many, many years ago I
was hired as planning
director for a small community
near Santa Barbara
called Isla Vista.
And this was after three riots.
This was in the Vietnam War era,
and there had been blow ups,
and the Bank of
America had been burned
to the ground in Isla Vista.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ATTWOOD: And there
had been this big upset.
And so the county and the
state came in and said,
we better put some
funding in this community
because things
aren't going so well
the way they are right now.
And so a self-appointed
governing entity was created,
which was elected by all the
people in this community,
and then they used this budget
to hire a planning director.
In this case, it was me.
So I had a budget which
in today's dollars
would be a couple
million dollars.
I was 20 years old.
>>LISA: Oh wow.
>>ATTWOOD: I had no
clue what I was doing,
and I was a little overwhelmed
to be honest with you.
My stomach was
upset all the time.
I had serious indigestion.
My skin was flaking off my face.
I mean, I was in bad shape.
I didn't know which
direction to take first.
>>LISA: Yeah, that's a
big job for a 20 year old.
>>ATTWOOD: It was.
It was.
It was a big job.
And a friend of mine
came up and said,
Chris, you should try meditation
because it's a great way
to eliminate stress, and
transcendental meditation
was the meditation
he recommended.
And so I said, sure,
I'll check it out,
and I went to the
lectures, and I started.
And from the very first
moment I sat down,
I noticed that something
serious had shifted.
I was experiencing
something different
than I had before--
which was great-- that
was enough to keep me
meditating for the next week.
But then my
indigestion went away,
and my skin stopped flaking.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ATTWOOD: And I had clarity
like I had never had before,
and I felt like I really
knew the direction to take,
and I thought, hmm,
this is pretty cool.
And so that kept me meditating
regularly for the next year.
And then at the
end of that year,
we had to get funding again
from the state and the county
government, and so I was
preparing this proposal,
and I went through, and
I got through three pages
of the things we
accomplished in that year.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ATTWOOD: Virtually
all of them things
that I had initiated in my
role, and I went, oh my god, I
could never have
done this if I hadn't
had this regular
practice in my life.
Because I was doing
it every morning,
20 minutes in the morning,
20 minutes in the afternoon.
We had this big, huge
office, and there
were a number of
people working there,
so I couldn't really sit
and meditate very well,
so I'd go in the bathroom.
>>LISA: [LAUGHING]
>>ATTWOOD: And
sit for 20 minutes
and do my ritual meditation.
>>LISA: That was your experience
of your official ritual,
but now, that was
how many years ago?
>>ATTWOOD: That was
more than 40 years ago,
and I still use that ritual.
And this is a really
great statement
of how do you create
rituals for yourself that
really are valuable?
Now this was one that I was
taught-- extremely valuable,
extremely beneficial-- but
it had some key elements
that any ritual needs to have.
One, it was simple to do.
It was easy and effortless.
It didn't take a lot of
time, relatively speaking,
and as a result of seeing
what happened in my life,
it had meaning for me.
I saw, oh, this is changing.
I'm feeling better.
I'm acting better.
I'm getting better results.
And so now that ritual
had meaning for me,
and that's probably one of the
most important things in ritual
today.
>>LISA: Is meaning?
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah,
because how many of us
have grown up in families where
our parents sort of dragged us
through their rituals
of their own tradition?
>>LISA: But they were
more unconscious rituals
that were just habitual.
>>ATTWOOD: Well
sometimes, and some of us
got dragged to
Thanksgiving dinners,
and we set around with
all these family members
and no one wanted
really to be there.
And half the family
wasn't talking
to the other half,
and we-- and as kids,
we had to get all dressed up and
sit there and behave ourselves,
and it didn't have
meaning for us.
But maybe as we got
older, taking Thanksgiving
as an example, we thought,
well this is a good thing.
I like this.
I want to make it something
valuable for my family.
So then we began creating
meaning in that ritual.
It was something, you know,
Thanksgiving is an
American holiday--
and I guess in Canada there's
also-- but we-- but by making
it something that
had personal meaning,
then we said, oh, this is
something I enjoy doing.
Now if we were
smart, as parents,
we structured it
so that there was
fun and interesting
activities for our kids
so that it was meaning
for them as well,
so they didn't have to go
through what we went through.
>>LISA: Now why did you call
the book "Your Hidden Riches?"
What do riches have
to do with rituals?
>>ATTWOOD: Ah, that's
a great question.
So you know, I think
most of us know
that we have untapped
potential inside of us
that we're just
not making use of.
And rituals are really
the age-old, time-tested,
and today scientifically
proven way
that people can tap
those unaccessed riches,
those-- that potential
that's there.
We've all heard this metaphor
that life is like a river,
and yet most of
us spend our lives
sort of at the
edges of the river,
crashing up against the rocks--
>>LISA: Rocks.
>>ATTWOOD: --and the
boulders, and getting
caught in the branches and the
brambles, and life is difficult
and its challenging, and
it's not much fun sometimes.
>>LISA: It's a grind.
>>ATTWOOD: It's
a grind, exactly.
Rituals are a way of taking
the boat of our life,
if I can say that,
and bringing it back
into the center of the river.
And what that means
is aligning our life
with who we are at
the deepest level.
This really is the
fundamental role
of rituals, and particularly
ceremonial rituals,
which I know we'll talk about.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ATTWOOD: That-- that
ceremonial ritual--
But rituals, in
general, are a way
of getting aligned
with what in the book
we call your unique life's
design because all of us
are born with a
design for our life.
And in fact, our
job when we're born
is to discover what is that.
>>LISA: Right, what is that?
>>ATTWOOD: And then
get aligned with it.
So rituals are a way
of creating alignment.
The way we know
that we're aligned
is because then
we are having fun.
>>LISA: Everything works, yes.
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah, then being
in the center of the river,
life flows.
It becomes comfortable and easy.
It becomes an adventure
because we're looking forward
to what's coming
around the next bend.
And rituals are a way of
creating that alignment
with the reason that we're here.
>>LISA: We're going
to take a look here
at a video that is a
traditional ritual that
is done with the Dali Lama
in creating and uncreating
the mandala.
So take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>NARRATOR: What the Dalai Lama
was unable to do in Bodhgaya
he performs here.
Laying out the first lines
of the sand mandala pattern.
It will be a mathematically
exact replica
of the design used in India.
The home falls silent.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Here the Dalai Lama
exercises his fully role
in leading prayers,
teachings, and the creation
of the mandala.
[DRUMMING]
[CHIMES]
[CHATTER]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
What remains is the destruction
of the mandala by the Dalai
Lama.
To show the impermanence
of all the things created,
the sand of the mandala will
be thrown into the Mooi River
where it will flow out into
the world as a blessing.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK ENDS]
>>LISA: How long
do you think they
have been creating that ritual?
I mean, based on how
many years is that?
And I'm asking for a reason.
I mean, just guess.
>>ATTWOOD: Thousands of years.
>>LISA: I mean it could
be thousands of years.
>>ATTWOOD: Several
thousands of years.
>>LISA: So why have we lost
that in the modern world?
I know that we're not
living in a monastery,
and it's not our
culture, but how
do we bring the monastery
to our modern world?
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah, yeah.
Well, the truth is that
about 400 years ago,
Lisa, we as a
society got enamored
with the scientific method--
with very good reason.
That science has brought a
tremendous amount of benefit
to us and our culture, and it's
had some very significant side
effects as well.
With the pace of technology
and communication advances--
>>LISA: And wear and tear on
the earth in many ways, yeah.
>>ATTWOOD: That
and also then we're
bombarded with more
information today
than anyone in our history
ever had to experience before.
In that process of science
and scientific advancement,
what happened is that scientists
and then society in general,
looked at traditional
cultures and said,
oh, these aren't scientific.
They're superstition,
and so we dismiss them.
And what I say is
that what we did
is we threw out the baby with
the bathwater, essentially.
I love what Dr. Wade Davis says.
He's one of the
leading anthropologists
in the world, Explorer
in Residence at National
Geographic, and he said, if
you took all the intelligence
that it took to put
a man on the moon
and you applied that
to understanding
the motions of the ocean, what
you would have is Polynesians.
>>LISA: [LAUGHING]
>>ATTWOOD: And
what he was saying
is that people of
traditional cultures,
non-Western societies, have
used our immense intellectual
capacities of the human
mind and applied them
to a different set of problems.
And what we in our
Western society said is,
oh, those things don't matter.
And what we're beginning
to wake up to is
those things do matter.
As just we were talking about
meditation, over the last 50,
60 years, research has begun--
scientific research has begun
on the effects of meditation, on
the effects of ritual practice.
And we're beginning to
see these things that
seem to be unscientific
and superstitious actually
create very substantial
and significant changes
in a person's life.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
That's interesting.
So it can actually reorganize
the brain, the ritual can,
into a way that
focuses it even more.
I mean, I think
that if we continue
on this path with our
super mechanized world,
in terms of
technology, it is going
to fry our immune system
because our focus is
so diffused at this point, and
ADD will be brought on by--
[LAUGHING]
I mean, it'll be the outside
in, ADD from technology--
that we need a way
to be able to focus
and re-pattern the
brain to align itself.
Because right now if you were
to look at the technology brain,
it's so diffused.
>>ATTWOOD: That's right.
>>LISA: It needs
a way of becoming
focused for long
periods of time.
>>ATTWOOD: Sure.
>>LISA: Do you ever watch old
movies, and they seem so slow?
>>ATTWOOD: Yes, I know.
It's really true.
>>LISA: They're like, oh my
god, that scene takes forever,
and movies these days
are so fast paced.
Even the conscious films
tend to be very fast edits.
>>ATTWOOD: Well, they have
to be because people don't
have the attention
span any longer.
>>LISA: Exactly my point.
>>ATTWOOD: Well,
and you know, what's
happened-- because we labeled
ritual as superstition,
what happened is we rejected it.
And so many people
in today's society,
oftentimes not so much for
our parents' generation,
but in our generation and
younger, that what you see
is that people have
gotten caught up
in a culture of
achievement, of I
have to do more and be
more and accomplish more
in order to get ahead,
to be successful,
to live the life
that I want to live.
And what we've discovered is
it becomes counterproductive.
And so what happens, as you
were referring to I think also,
is that you see
that 25% of women
are on antidepressants today.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ATTWOOD: The use of
antidepressants generally
has multiplied 400
times since the '80s.
That we see that a 1/3
of Americans are obese.
We see that teen suicide
is the number three
cause of death
among young adults.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ATTWOOD: So these
things are just
indicators that we
need to recalibrate
our culture and our system.
And that's why I believe
this book is so important,
because we now know through
science that rituals, in fact,
create very positive outcomes,
and that they can, in fact,
allow us to deal with
this immense overload
that every one of
us has to deal with.
And when we feel
overwhelmed, rituals
give us a way to come
back to ourselves
and restore ourselves.
>>LISA: Can you
talk a little bit
about the science of rituals
and what it actually-- what
has been proven?
>>ATTWOOD: Sure.
So there's an immense body
of research on meditation,
for example, and
I'm sure you've--
>>LISA: Tibetan study
and everything, yes.
>>ATTWOOD: Talked about
that in many contexts.
In terms of ritual
practice generally, there's
a number of things
that have been found.
Dr. Andrew Newberg, I
mentioned earlier, probably
the leading neuroscientist who
study the effect of ritual.
>>LISA: And meditation, right?
>>ATTWOOD: And meditation also.
>>LISA: "God in the Brain"
and all this great books.
Yeah.
>>ATTWOOD: That's right.
And what he said,
what they found,
is that ritual creates a
balance between the sympathetic,
the parasympathetic
nervous system.
So these different parts
of our nervous system,
that one which excites us,
and one which calms us down.
And interestingly enough, that
different kinds of rituals
can create different
effects, but then they
bring the two
systems into balance.
So for example, we've
all seen rituals
of dancing in traditional
cultures-- drumming
and dancing-- and
oftentimes those people
will go into a
hyper-alert state.
And when you study them
neural-physiologically what you
see is that they're very active,
but then they're-- they come
to a settled place
of mind and emotions,
that there's this simultaneous
thing going on of rest
and awake alertness
at the same time.
And that's been seen
in meditation as well.
Meditation is a calming
ritual, calming activity,
and yet you see that the
mind becomes alert and awake.
So from both ends-- and I
found it really fascinating--
because of course I've been
immersed in meditation for so
long-- I was familiar
with that research.
But when he mentioned
that even when
you study people who are engaged
in these very active rituals,
that when they go into this
hyper-state, that sometimes
called-- sometimes a trance
state or one thing or another,
there's actually a physiological
change that takes place,
and as a result
there's a balance
created between these two
aspects of our nervous system.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So it creates a parasympathetic
response, essentially,
ritual does, because it's
got a calming effect.
And it can.
>>ATTWOOD: It can.
Well, see, meditation
creates alertness.
Meditation naturally
has that effect
of calming, but then
with increased alertness.
The dance, you have
increased activity,
but then afterwards
this calming effect.
>>LISA: Well, as it-- in the
case of the athlete, of course,
it doesn't create
a calming effect.
They have the stimulus.
>>ATTWOOD: Hyper-alertness.
Right, exactly, right.
>>LISA: So you and I both
have young daughters,
and in the past we've
talked about there
being the absence of the
ritual for the coming of age
of a young girl when
their bodies change.
And there are, in different
religious contexts,
the coming of age ceremonies and
the rites of passage ceremonies
and so forth, but
when a young girl
goes into the
change in her body,
it's so-- it's scary sometimes,
and they don't understand.
They get their
period, and there's
a lot of terror around
that for young girls.
So it would be so great to
create something that really
honors that process,
as a young girl,
to understand the changes of
her body and what it's about.
And you have a beautiful video
here that the Native Americans
have created-- a
ritual that they've
created around the coming
of age for a young girl.
Let's take a look at this, and
then we'll talk about this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>NARRATOR: Beneath White
Mountain in New Mexico,
the Mescalero Apache
Reservation prepares
for a coming of age ritual.
[CHANTING]
Over the span of four days,
13-year-old Dashina Cochise
will pass through ancient
tests of strength, endurance,
and character that
will make her a woman.
[CHANTING]
The Mescalero Apache hold
the ritual every 4th of July.
It's a grueling ordeal
intended to prepare girls
for the trials of womanhood.
>>MALLETTE COCHISE: When
she was a little girl,
I knew this is what I
wanted to have for her.
>>NARRATOR: Dashina's mother,
Mallett, has spent more than a
year preparing for
this week of ceremony.
Family members and friends
will help her feed and care
for more than 50 guests.
The family's most important task
is selecting Dashina's Medicine
Woman.
Zelda Yaza will instruct
Dashina in the ways
of traditional Apache womanhood.
The four-day ceremony
encapsulates the Apache
creation story.
Dashina will move through
the stages of life--
infant, child, adolescent,
woman-- culminating
in an all-night dance that
will test her endurance.
The ritual begins with the
rising of the morning star.
The ceremony requires Dashina
to live by strict rules.
These four days mean little
sleep, scant food, and the need
to set aside emotion.
Throughout the ordeal, she must
wear a face of stoic resolve.
>>DASHINA COCHISE: I feel
very excited and happy,
even though I can't
smile, but I'll
try to show it in some way.
>>NARRATOR: Before Dashina
joins the other girls,
she is blessed,
dusted with pollen,
the symbol of fertility.
[CHANTING]
The girls start their
journey in a sacred teepee
built by their male relatives.
>>MALLETTE: Let's go right now.
They're putting the teepee up.
>>NARRATOR: The basket
is filled with pollen
and other ceremonial objects.
As their ancestors
did, the girls
run toward the rising sun,
circling the basket four times
to mark the four stages of life.
The fourth and final
day brings Dashina
to the cusp of womanhood.
She ascends the hill
to pray to the mountain
spirits for a long
and successful life.
[CHANTING]
With darkness near,
it's time to dance
beside the ceremonial fire.
Dashina and the other girls
will dance all night long,
much of the time hidden
in the big teepee.
[CHANTING]
More than 10 hours later,
Dashina is still dancing.
The medicine men greet
the sun, a signal
that the final test is near.
The girls' faces are
painted with white clay
symbolizing the goddess.
On their last circuit
around the sacred basket,
the girls wipe away
the symbolic clay.
With the falling of the
teepee, their right of passage
is complete.
Dashina receives her
Apache woman's name,
Morningstar Feather.
>>DASHINA COCHISE:
>>MALLETTE: Morningstar Feather.
Everything went well.
She's going to be
a strong woman.
>>NARRATOR: Her
community gathers,
acknowledging that this
girl has earned the right
to live as a woman of the tribe.
As an Apache woman,
Dashina serves
as a symbol of her culture,
renewing and protecting
a way of life that's
in danger of vanishing.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK ENDS]
>>LISA: I really think
it's helpful to see
that type of ceremonial ritual.
In some way in the modern
world it's gotten lost,
yet that still exists
on a daily basis.
There's ways that we can
take those types of rituals
and reform them for
our modern lives.
>>ATTWOOD: Absolutely.
>>LISA: What are some of
the other ones that you
have written about in the
book that we could actually
water down a little
bit or make our own?
>>NARRATOR: Well, I'll tell you
how I'm adapting some of those
rituals--
>>LISA: That's a good word.
>>ATTWOOD: --to my children,
because as you mentioned,
I've got two daughters.
Now they're too
young yet to be going
through that physical
change in their body,
but I've been thinking about
it, because during the writing
of the book we interviewed
this amazing Yoruban woman, who
now lives in Los Angeles
but grew up in Nigeria.
And what she told us is her life
was always filled with ritual.
She took it for granted.
Everything you did,
even greeting someone,
was a ritual that,
depending upon whether they
were in front of you
or coming up beside you
or coming up from
behind, there would
be a different way
of greeting them.
I thought, wow,
that's fascinating.
But the story that had
the biggest impact on me
is when she described
her coming of age.
And about a year before she
was about to start her period,
the elders, the women
elders of the village,
sat down with her
several times and put
in context what was
happening for her.
And they said, you are a woman--
you are becoming a woman,
and as a woman you are
so fortunate because you
are becoming a
co-creator of life.
No man can be born without
coming through a woman's womb,
and so you have this great
role and responsibility.
This is a huge opportunity.
And your body is going
to go through this change
to enable you to be able
to give birth to children,
and this is one of
the highest things
that a woman-- or
a person can do.
This is one of the best
and most wonderful things
that could happen to anyone.
And so when she
actually got to the day,
and her body started this new
experience, she was so excited.
>>LISA: Excited.
>>ATTWOOD: She ran in to tell
her mom, and her mom went, yes!
And they went out and got
all the women in the village,
and they made a big feast,
and they celebrated--
>>LISA: Wouldn't that be nice?
>>ATTWOOD: --this change.
And they dress her up in white
and put her up on a pedestal.
>>LISA: A mount.
>>ATTWOOD: In front
of the whole group,
the whole village, and it
was just a celebratory right.
And the elders sat with
her again and connected her
to her ancestors, to the
tradition that she was now
a part of, and they made
her feel so special.
And she said that
ritual and others
as she was growing up, even as
she went to England to study,
as she came to America
to live, that they
made her feel special.
She never had any
self esteem issues.
She said, I always
knew I was special.
I always knew I was beautiful.
And I know that that was
because of those rituals.
>>LISA: It linked to
other things in her life.
>>ATTWOOD: Absolutely.
>>LISA: That's great.
As young women today
in America, they
start their periods so
much younger, so telling
a 12-year-old they're
going to give birth
doesn't work anymore.
And it could have to
do with the hormones
that they're eating
in foods these days,
and genetically modified.
I mean their bodies are
changing so much faster,
at least in the west, that there
has to be another way that you
can actually gradually
step up to that level,
that maybe that
teenage girl was at.
So can we modify
these rituals in order
to adapt to changing times?
>>ATTWOOD: Sure.
Well, I'll tell you what
I'm doing with my girls.
My six-year-old is
just starting school,
and so this is a big
transition, right?
>>LISA: Rite of passage, yes.
>>ATTWOOD: And so I
took the whole family
to a special place, and we--
she spent a day with her mom,
a day with me, and
then a day where
we celebrated this
new experience.
She was now becoming
a young girl
who would be going to school.
And I think this is
a way of preparing.
There's no physical change
that's taking place,
but by celebrating this
significant transition, now
we have begun the
process of making
that a pattern in
our family's life.
Because when she
is ready, when she
gets to be around 10,
11, 12, in that age,
then I am planning to take the
elders in our village, which
is my business partner, Janet
Bray Attwood, who you know.
>>LISA: Oh great, great.
>>ATTWOOD: And the
co-author of our book,
Dr. Sylva Dvorak, who
are both very much
immersed in rituals,
and her mom,
and send her with these elders
off to a very special place
and have them spend
a week with her.
>>LISA: Nice.
Yes.
>>ATTWOOD: Just
enjoying being a woman,
and I'm thinking probably
of someplace like Hawaii,
someplace that's very
feminine in its nature.
>>LISA: Oh yes.
>>ATTWOOD: That she
can realize that this
is a wonderful time in her life,
something to look forward to,
as well as covering the
practical things of what
does that mean, in terms
of relating to boys
and doing things like that.
But I feel like it's
important that girls today,
not only with their parents
but with other elders
that they respect, that
they have the opportunity
to learn about this
transition, learn
about what it means for them.
And I think for
me, I'll tell you
when she gets to
be 11 or 12, but I
think this is a way that we
can adapt these transition
rituals so that our children are
prepared for the changes that
are happening in their life.
We'll do another
one when she becomes
21, when each of our children
becomes 21, that now taking
on that mantel of
responsibility.
>>LISA: There's so many
different areas in life,
or times of life,
where you go through
these major transitions.
I mean the first time
that you have sex,
and all these
different things, where
you go through these
huge transitions in life
that you can look
back on as an adult
and say, oh my god,
that was horrific,
or you could actually
get ahead of the curve.
And menopause, I mean you could
create a ritual for menopause.
>>ATTWOOD: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Rather than the--
[LAUGHING]
--mystery around menopause
and the hot flashes
that go with it.
You can create different
types of ritual around it.
For aging parents, as they're
going into decade changes
that they never
thought that they
would know how to deal with.
There's so many different ways
that you can create rituals.
What are-- The book is just
recently coming out, right,
so you haven't really
gotten a lot of response
back from what's
working yet for people,
or what rituals they're
creating in their life, right?
>>ATTWOOD: Well, a little bit.
>>LISA: A little bit?
>>ATTWOOD: Because
we've been talking
about it for some months now,
and the book is coming out,
and I'll share that.
But I wanted to just comment on
this aspect of life transition
rituals.
The other thing that this
Yoruban woman shared with us
is that when she became 60,
which is the traditional age
to become an elder
of the village,
that there's a whole week-long
ceremony that they have
for this coming of
age, the entering
into the age of wisdom.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting, yes.
>>ATTWOOD: And three of
the women from her village
flew all the way from
Nigeria to Los Angeles
to be here for this
very special occasion.
And I just-- See, I don't think
most people in our society
who turn 60 actually have the
opportunity to celebrate and be
recognized as someone who is
looked to for wisdom and advice
and guidance.
And I think it's such an
important, invaluable way
that we can honor the elder
members of our society
who have had a lot of
experience, who have things
that they could share with
us that could make younger
people be able to have
a smoother, easier life.
So I love that.
But coming back to what
have people created.
We have something we call
the 30-Day Ritual Challenge,
and it's a really
wonderful, simple way
for people to begin to get
a taste of how powerful can
ritual be in your life.
And the basic
concept is is first
get clear on your five passions.
That's the Passion Test.
And then we guide
people through creating
their own three-minute
ritual that they'll
perform daily for 30 days.
And part of that ritual
is setting an intention,
and we invite them
to set an intention
to make one significant change
and say what that change will
be that will help them get
aligned with their passions
and purpose.
And so as people have
gone through this,
they'll do lots of
different things.
And one woman, she spends
most of her days working
on the computer,
she works from home.
And she said, I'd
gotten into such a grind
that I would just get
on in the morning,
and I'd sometimes
forget to eat, and I'd
be exhausted at
the end of the day.
And so the ritual that she
instituted is that she said,
I'm going to smell the
roses, so to speak.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
Yes.
>>ATTWOOD: She said I'm going
to take three minutes-- five
minutes, actually, to
get up, go outside,
and I'm going to go
for a short walk,
and I'm going to
look for flowers,
and I'm going to consciously
stop, notice, smell them, enjoy
them, and bring that
experience into my life
because I don't get
that on the computer.
And she said that it was
so fun and so wonderful
and made such an impact
even on her productivity
that she now does
it in the morning,
and she does it again in
the afternoon, every hour
and a 1/2 or so.
>>LISA: Instead of maybe
eating, or anything else
that she was doing that was
more of an unconscious ritual,
she does that as
an intentional one.
>>ATTWOOD: That's right.
Eating while she's
on the computer.
>>LISA: Right-- unconscious.
So we also didn't talk about the
men, and their coming of age,
and the Bar Mitzvah
and all sorts
of different ceremonies
for men as well.
What would you
recommend for a coming
of age as a male teenager maybe?
>>ATTWOOD: For young
men, it's an opportunity
to prove yourself.
The coming of age
ceremonies for men
oftentimes involve a
challenge of some sort.
And it's a thing that builds
the character of the men.
It allows them to connect
with their own strength,
and their own-- and gain
confidence in their own ability
to be able to make
something happen.
In the ancient days it was
going out and going on a hunt
all by themselves,
but today it could
be different kinds
of challenges.
And in one of the stories with
a modern day shaman, who also
happens to be a minister--
I thought that was very
interesting-- a Protestant
minister-- that he conducts
coming of age ceremonies
for young people,
and with a young man who
is seven years of age,
he said-- he gave
him a challenge.
He said, imagine that you're
with two of your friends,
and you come in the middle
of the road to a bag,
and each of you is blind.
All three of you are blind.
And you come to the bag,
and you find in the bag
that there are two-- I think
two or three-- three eyes.
There's the opportunity to see.
Oh no, sorry, there was-- I
think there was only two eyes.
So what would you
do with this bag?
Well, what would you do
with this ability to see?
And the young boys--
>>LISA: Two additional
sets of eyes?
>>ATTWOOD: Well, and what he
meant was two abilities to see.
>>LISA: Got it.
>>ATTWOOD: As opposed to
physical eyes-- but two
things-- the ability to see.
And he said, well, I would
give them to my friends
so that they could see.
And he said, well, wouldn't you
want to keep one for yourself?
He said, well, it
wouldn't be so important,
because I would've gotten
used to not being able to see,
and I would want them
to be able to see.
>>LISA: Huh--interesting.
>>ATTWOOD: And there's no
right answer to the challenge,
but it's just an example
of giving a young boy
the opportunity to see
how would I handle myself,
what would I do?
I know some families
that we interviewed
that were
traditionally-- actually
this man, for his young
boy-- when he became
a young man, a little
older, about 13 years old,
they took him out
to a remote area,
and he had to camp with nothing.
He had no tent, no
food, no anything.
Now his father has trained him.
>>LISA: But it's just like
the Native American tradition.
>>ATTWOOD: Yeah.
He had to go out, and
he had to, for-- he
had to spend a night
and a day all by himself
and find his way back
to where they were.
Now he said set it up so
that he could watch is son,
so that he could
pay attention to--
>>LISA: Be safe--yeah.
>>ATTWOOD: What was going
on so he could feel safe,
but still it was an opportunity
for the boy to prove himself.
And for boys more
than girls I would
say that it's really
important that young men have
the opportunity to see
that they can do things
without their parents, without
help from their-- from anyone
else, that they
have that ability
to be self sufficient
if they need to be.
>>LISA: And to feel
safe at the same time.
>>ATTWOOD: That's right.
>>LISA: So if some wanted
to create their own ritual,
they would need to
set an intention,
they would need
to have something
to do with meaning
in their life,
and what's another aspect of it?
>>ATTWOOD: Everyday
rituals are really simple,
and intention can be a
ritual in and of itself,
that you decide I'm
going to take a minute--
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>ATTWOOD: Or two minutes
when I wake up in the morning,
and I'm going to set the
intention for what am I going
to do--
>>LISA: That could
be the ritual.
>>ATTWOOD: What am I
going to accomplish today?
Or we all take a
shower-- what if you just
take-- while you're
taking a shower
you thought what am
I grateful for today.
>>LISA: This is your time
of prayer or something--yes.
>>ATTWOOD: That's right.
So everyday rituals are
things of just saying
what will serve me?
What will help me
to be more at ease,
to have more balance in my life,
to be focused on the things
that I really want to
experience in my life--
all of those things--
and they don't
have to take up a lot of time.
Now ceremonial rituals
are more involved.
And as you know, Lisa, as we
did the research on this book,
we found looking at
traditions all over the world,
ceremonial rituals have
seven distinct aspects.
And so you can create a
simple ceremonial ritual.
It doesn't have to
take a lot of time,
but it does involve
more aspects than just
I'm going to set an intention.
>>LISA: Right.
>>ATTWOOD: You know--
>>LISA: It's linked
more to tradition.
>>ATTWOOD: Or things that
are meaningful to you.
The one most important
thing about ritual
is what you said, is that it
has personal meaning for you,
and that's what will keep
you doing it again and again
and again.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
Well, thank you so much.
There's been-- I've
learned a lot here.
I've learned a lot
about the rituals
that I have that I didn't
know that I had in my life,
and also connecting to a deeper
sense of ritual in modern day
life.
So thank you so much.
>>ATTWOOD: Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: Fascinating information.
>>ATTWOOD: Such a pleasure.
>>LISA: And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with Chris Attwood or if
you'd like to share it
with your friends, you
can go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]